\section{Deriving rate constants}
\label{subsec:rate-constants}

In the experiment, the parent ion \CD and He$_n$CD$^+$ complexes count are
monitored as a function of trap time (in the following, it will be referred to
as \qt{kinetics scan}) where all ions are monitored for a duration of up to 6
s, with 4-5 iterations per data point, as shown in Figure
\ref{fig:fit:rate-constants}. The coupled ordinary differential (ODE) rate
equations, as discussed in section \ref{subsec:rate-equations} and
\ref{subsec:rate-loss-channels}, are solved using the implicit Runge-Kutta
method of the Radau IIA family of order 5 \cite{hairer_implementation_1996},
and the solution is numerically fitted to the measured data using
Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm also known as damped least-squares (DLS) method
(as shown as solid lines in Figure \ref{fig:fit:rate-constants}) to derive the
rates [\pers] $R_e$ and $R_{CID}$. These computations are carried out using the
SciPy library \cite{virtanen_scipy_2020}. The corresponding rate coefficients
are derived from the rates as described in equations
\ref{eqn:rate-theory:R*-simplified} and \ref{eqn:rate:rcid}.

\input{chapters/CD+ kinetics/figs/rate-constants-fitting}
\input{chapters/CD+ kinetics/figs/off-rate-constant_1-funcOf_nHe}

Figure \ref{fig:off:effective-rate-constants} shows the exemplary derived
effective binary rate constant $k_e$ plotted against the Helium number density
    [He] to determine the ternary association rate constant ($k_3$) and radiative
rate ($k_r$) using Eq.\ref{eqn:rate-theory:k*-simplified} at 4.8(3) K
temperature. The radiative rate, $k_r=1.2(1.9) \cdot 10^{-17}$ could not be
determined, and the derived error margin can be viewed as an upper limit to
this value. . Thus, one can simplify the equation
\ref{eqn:rate-theory:R*-simplified} such that $k_3[He] >> k_r$ then:

\begin{equation}
    R_e = k_e[He] = k_3[He]^2
    % k_3 = \frac{R_e}{[He]^2}
    \label{eqn:rate-theory:k*-further-simplified}
\end{equation}

\input{chapters/CD+ kinetics/tables/rate-constants}
\input{chapters/CD+ kinetics/figs/rate-constants-higher-order}

Figure \ref{fig:off:rate-constants} and \ref{fig:rate-constants-higher-order}
shows the derived ternary association rate constant ($k_3$) at a nominal trap
temperature of 4.8(3) K using equation
\ref{eqn:rate-theory:k*-further-simplified}. Each data point results from a
single kinetics scan (as shown in Figure \ref{fig:fit:rate-constants}) at a
given number density. Since the rate constants are defined to be independent
(only when $k_3[He] >> k_r$) of number density, one can compute a weighted mean
value as reported in Table \ref{tab:k3:rate-constants} and
\ref{tab:kCID:rate-constants}. It should be noted that if the trap loss channel
is not included (see Section \ref{subsec:rate-loss-channels}), then the
formation rate ($k_3$) does not vary within the given error bar, but the
dissociation rate ($k_{CID}$) increases by $20-25\%$. This is also evidently
seen as shown in Table \ref{tab:k3:rate-constants} and
\ref{tab:kCID:rate-constants}, i.e., the previously reported values
\cite{Brunken2017} for $k_{CID_n}$ disagree within the uncertainties due to
lack of not considering the loss channels. However, the trap loss channel is
required to fit the total sum (indicated as a black line in Figure
\ref{fig:trap-and-m30-loss-channel-comparision}). Hence all the derived rate
constants include the trap loss and other loss channels as described in Section
\ref{subsec:rate-loss-channels}.