\subsection{Determining the radiation power at the trap region}
\label{subsec:rot:power}

\input{chapters/technical-details/figs/power-curve-453GHz/feed-horn}

The feed horn antenna's electric field radiation emitted/propagated is shown in
Figure \ref{fig:feed-horn}. The propagation of the emitted Gaussian beam radius
($w(z)$) from a horn antenna is given by:

\input{chapters/technical-details/figs/power-curve-453GHz/beam_propagation}

\begin{equation}
    w(z) = w_0 * \sqrt{1 + \left( \frac{z}{Z_R} \right) ^2}
    \label{eqn:beam-propagation}
\end{equation}
where $Z_R$ is the Rayleigh length (or Rayleigh range) for Gaussian beams.

$Z_R$  is determined by the waist radius $w_0$ and the wavelength ($\lambda$) as shown below:

\[Z_R = \frac{\pi \cdot w_0^2}{\lambda}\]

Using a diagonal horn antenna (VDI waveguide band WM-570) of length, aperture
diameter and beam waist radius of 36, 3.6 and 1.5 mm, respectively. The
Gaussian beam propagation simulation for a frequency $\Delta \nu = 453$ GHz is
shown in Figure \ref{fig:power-curve:beam-propagation}.

\input{chapters/technical-details/figs/power-curve-453GHz/beam_propagation_power_curve}

As the Gaussian laser beam propagates, the waist radius increases in size and
the corresponding intensity profile of the electric field is given by:

\begin{equation}
    \begin{split}
        I(r) & = I_0 \cdot exp \left[ -2 \left (\frac{r}{w(z)}\right ) ^2\right] \\
        & = \frac{2P}{\pi w(z)^2}
        \cdot exp \left[ -2 \left (\frac{r}{w(z)}\right ) ^2\right]
    \end{split}
    \label{eqn:beam-propagation:intensity}
\end{equation}

where $I_0$ is the peak irradiance at the centre of the beam, r is the radial
distance away from the propagation axis, w(z) is the radius of the laser beam
where the irradiance is 1/e$^2$ (13.5\%) of $I_0$, z is the distance propagated
from the plane where the wavefront is flat, and P is the total power of the
beam.\\

Figure \ref{fig:power-curve:beam-propagation-power} shows the intensity profile
using Eq. \ref{eqn:beam-propagation:intensity}, when the beam waist radius,
$w(z)=2.5$ cm, is at the trap entrance (see Figure
\ref{fig:power-curve:beam-propagation}). Since the ion-trap aperture diameter
is 0.3 cm which is much narrower compared to the incoming beam radius (2.5 cm),
one needs to consider an offset for the Gaussian beam centre reaching the trap
centre. Therefore, the figure \ref{eqn:beam-propagation:intensity} also
features the orange marked region, which indicates the actual power estimated
to reach the trap depending on its alignment, $r(z)$, \emph{w.r.t} the
propagating Gaussian beam centre, $r_0(z)$. If we assume that in our
experiment, $r(z)=0-1.5$ cm, then the final radiation power reaching the trap,
for $\Delta \nu=453$ GHz frequency is 9-19 \% of the peak power (250 $\mu$W),
i.e., $35(12)\ \mu$W.

% However, one can 100 \% focus the beam into the trap using a combination of radiation source and optics. The optics design and details are discussed in Section \ref{subsec:THz-optics}.